Adding first section about XLSForm (#648)
opengisch/QField-docs: documentation/how-to/advanced-how-tos/xls-forms-plugin.en.md

---
title: XLS-Form Converter

> tx_slug: documentation_xls-form_plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: XLSForm Converter
tx_slug: documentation_xlsform_plugin
```

---

# XLS-Form Converter Plugin

Use the **XLS-Form Converter** plugin to convert existing XLS forms into QGIS projects.
This tool migrates all configurations from your XLS form and allows you to upload the result directly to QFieldCloud.

> Once loaded in QGIS, the project is ready to be deployed for use in the field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# XLSForm Converter Plugin for QGIS

Use the **XLSForm Converter** plugin to convert existing XLS forms into QGIS projects.
This tool migrates all configurations from your form into a configured project alongside a geopackage containing your survey layers. The plugin allows you to upload the result directly to QFieldCloud provided you have installed QFieldSync. Once converted, the resulting project is ready to be loaded into QField for use in the field.
```

## XLS Forms

XLS Forms is a standard used by several survey products such as [ODK](https://getodk.org/) or [KoboToolbox](https://www.kobotoolbox.org/).
XLS Forms is built on a spreadsheet format using Excel as the standard.
In simple terms a survey is made up of several "Questions" that can be presented in different formats (integer, text, lists etc.).

> To learn more about the standard please visit [More about XLS forms](https://xlsform.org/en/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## More on XLSForm

XLSForm is a standard used by several survey products such as [ODK](https://getodk.org/) or [KoboToolbox](https://www.kobotoolbox.org/). Built using spreadsheets, the standard is simple an easy to understand. To learn more about the standard, please visit [this reference website](https://xlsform.org/).
```

## Download the plugin

In the plugin manager in QGIS, the plugin ["XLS-form Converter"](https://github.com/opengisch/XLSFormConverter) is available.

!!! Workflow

    1. Direct to *Plugins* > *Manage and Install Plugins* > *All*
    2. Search for XLS-Form Converter and click "Install Plugin".

        !![XLS-Form Converter Plugin](../../assets/images/xls-form-plugin-interface.png,500px)

>      Once it is installed it will appear in your processing box

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     Once it is installed it will appear in the processing toolbox panel
```

        !![XLS Converter Process Interface](../../assets/images/xls-form-processing-windows.png,800px)
    3. Select your preferred basemap:
         - OpenStreetMap
         - Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (HOT)
    4. (Optional) You can directly turn your project into a QFieldCloud project if you check the according checkbox.
    5. (Optional) Under **Advanced Parameters** you can further customize the settings of your project:
         - Set your desired project extent
         - Define a preferred coordinate reference system.
        **Note**: By default the WGS 84: Pseudo Transmercator (EPSG:3857) will be used.
         - "Pre-fill project with features' geometries and matching attributes" allows you to take an existing feature with the **exact** table names and add it to the project by default.
    6. Choose the location of where your project is stored.
    7. Click "Run" and wait.
    In case successful, the new project will be saved in your selected project folder.

## More Information

If you want to know about what is all possible with the XLS-Forms Converter Plugins and what it has been used for, have a look at the resources below:

> - [XLS Converter Plugin Source Code](https://github.com/opengisch/XLSFormConverter)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [XLSForm Converter Plugin source code](https://github.com/opengisch/XLSFormConverter)
```

> - [OPENGIS.ch Blog Post](https://www.opengis.ch/2025/06/02/xlsform-converter-unlock-a-world-of-surveys-with-our-brand-new-qgis-plugin/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [OPENGIS.ch blog post](https://www.opengis.ch/2025/06/02/xlsform-converter-unlock-a-world-of-surveys-with-our-brand-new-qgis-plugin/)
```

> - [Facebook post](https://www.facebook.com/photo/?fbid=122214315734088610&set=a.122120529350088610)

Reviewer: I don't think we should include Facebook links in the documentation (especially when they are a link to the blog post we already include a line above ;) ).

```suggestion
```
